.TH COQ-TEX 1 "29 March 1995"

.SH NAME
coq-tex \- Process Coq phrases embedded in LaTeX files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B coq-tex
[
.BI \-o \ output-file
]
[
.BI \-n \ line-width
]
[
.BI \-image \ coq-image
]
[
.B \-w
]
[
.B \-v
]
[
.B \-sl
]
[
.B \-hrule
]
[
.B \-small
]
.I input-file ...


.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.B coq-tex
filter extracts Coq phrases embedded in LaTeX files, evaluates
them, and insert the outcome of the evaluation after each phrase.

Three LaTeX environments are provided to include Coq code in
the input files:
.TP
.B coq_example
The phrases between \\begin{coq_example} and \\end{coq_example} are
evaluated and copied into the output file. Each phrase is followed by
the response of the toplevel loop.
.TP
.B coq_example*
The phrases between \\begin{coq_example*} and \\end{coq_example*} are
evaluated and copied into the output file. The responses of the
toplevel loop are discarded.
.TP
.B coq_eval
The phrases between \\begin{coq_eval} and \\end{coq_eval} are
silently evaluated. They are not copied into the output file, and the
responses of the toplevel loop are discarded.
.PP
The resulting LaTeX code is stored in the file
.IR file \&.v.tex
if the input file has a name of the form
.IR file \&.tex,
otherwise the name of the output file is the name of the input file
with `.v.tex' appended.

The files produced by
.B coq-tex
can be directly processed by LaTeX. 
Both the Coq phrases and the toplevel output are typeset in
typewriter font.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI \-o \ output-file
Specify the name of a file where the LaTeX output is to be stored. A
dash `\-' causes the LaTeX output to be printed on standard output.
.TP
.BI \-n \ line-width
Set the line width. The default is 72 characters. The responses of the
toplevel loop are folded if they are longer than the line width. No
folding is performed on the Coq input text.
.TP
.BI \-image \ coq-image
Cause the file
.IR coq-image
to be executed to evaluate the Coq phrases. By default,
this is the command 
.IR coqtop
without specifying any path which is used to evaluate the Coq phrases.
.TP
.B \-w
Cause lines to be folded on a space character whenever possible,
avoiding word cuts in the output. By default, folding occurs at
the line width, regardless of word cuts.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode. Prints the Coq answers on the standard output.
Useful to detect errors in Coq phrases.
.TP
.B \-sl
Slanted mode. The Coq answers are written in a slanted font.
.TP
.B \-hrule
Horizontal lines mode. The Coq parts are written between two
horizontal lines.
.TP
.B \-small
Small font mode. The Coq parts are written in a smaller font.


.SH CAVEATS
The \\begin... and \\end... phrases must sit on a line by themselves,
with no characters before the backslash or after the closing brace.
Each Coq phrase must be terminated by `.' at the end of a line.
Blank space is accepted between `.' and the newline, but any other
character will cause coq-tex to ignore the end of the phrase,
resulting in an incorrect shuffling of the responses into the phrases.
(The responses ``lag behind''.)

.SH SEE ALSO

.B coqtop
(1).
