.TH COQ 1 "February 9, 2009"

.SH NAME
coqchk \- The Coq Proof Assistant compiled libraries verifier


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B coqchk
[
.B options
]
.I files-or-modules


.SH DESCRIPTION

.B coqchk
is the standalone checker of compiled libraries (.vo files produced by
coqc) for the Coq Proof Assistant. See the Reference Manual for more
information. It returns with exit code 0 if all the requested tasks
succeeded. A non-zero return code means that something went wrong: some
library was not found, corrupted content, type-checking failure, etc.

.IR files-or-modules \&
is a list of modules to be checked. Modules can be referred to either
by a filename (without the .vo suffix) or by their (possibly
qualified) module name.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI \-I \ dir, \ \-\-include \ dir
add directory 
.I dir
in the include path

.TP
.BI \-R \ dir\ coqdir          
recursively map physical
.I dir
to logical
.I coqdir

.TP
.BI \-where
print Coq's standard library location and exit

.TP
.BI \-silent
makes coqchk less verbose.

.TP
.BI \-admit \ file-or-module
tag the specified module and all its dependencies as trusted, and will
not be rechecked, unless explicitly requested by other options.

.TP
.BI \-norec \ file-or-module
specifies that the given module shall be verified without requesting
to check its dependencies

.TP
.BI \-m,\ \-\-memory
displays a summary of the memory used by the checker

.TP
.BI \-o,\ \-\-output\-context
displays a summary of the logical content that have been
verified: assumptions and usage of impredicativity

.TP
.BI \-impredicative\-set
allows the checker to verify libraries that have been compiled with
this flag.

.TP
.BI \-v
print Coq version and exit

.TP
.BI \-where
print Coq's standard library location and exit

.TP
.BI \-h,\ \-\-help
print list of options

.SH SEE ALSO

.BR coqtop (1),
.BR coqc (1),
.BR coq_makefile (1),
.BR coqdep (1).
.br
.I
The Coq Reference Manual.
.I
The Coq web site: http://coq.inria.fr
