.TH ROCQIDE 1
.
.SH NAME
rocqide \- graphical interface for the Rocq Prover
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rocqide
[
options
]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
.B rocqide
is a gtk graphical interface for the Rocq Prover.
.PP
For command-line-oriented or batch-oriented use of Rocq, see
.BR rocq (1);
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.TP
.B \-h
Show the complete list of options accepted by
.BR rocqide .
.TP
.BI \-I\  dir, \ \-include\  dir
Add directory
.I dir
in the include path.
.TP
.BI \-R\  dir\ rocqdir
Recursively map physical
.I dir
to logical
.I rocqdir.
.TP
.B \-src
Add source directories in the include path.
.TP
.B \-nois
Start with an empty state.
.TP
.BI \-load\-ml\-object\  f
Load ML object file
.I f.
.TP
.BI \-load\-ml\-source\  f
Load ML file
.I f.
.TP
.BI \-l\  f, \ \-load\-vernac\-source\  f
Load Rocq file
.IR f .v
(Load
.IR f. ).
.TP
.BI \-lv\  f, \ \-load\-vernac\-source\-verbose\  f
Load Rocq file
.IR f .v
(Load Verbose
.IR f. ).
.TP
.BI \-load\-vernac\-object\  path
Load Rocq library
.I path
(Require
.IR path. ).
.TP
.BI \-require-import\  path
Load Rocq library
.I path
and import it (Require Import
.IR path. ).
.TP
.BI \-compile\  f
Compile Rocq file
.IR f .v
(implies
.BR \-batch ).
.TP
.BI \-compile\-verbose\  f
Verbosely compile Rocq file
.IR f .v
(implies
.BR -batch ).
.TP
.B \-where
Print Rocq's standard library location and exit.
.TP
.B -v
Print Rocq version and exit.
.TP
.B \-q
Skip loading of rcfile.
.TP
.BI \-init\-file\  f
Set the rcfile to
.I f.
.TP
.B \-emacs
Tells Rocq it is executed under Emacs.
.TP
.BI \-dump\-glob\  f
Dump globalizations in file
.I f
(to be used by
.BR rocq (1) doc).
.TP
.B \-impredicative\-set
Set sort Set impredicative.
.TP
.B \-dont\-load\-proofs
Don't load opaque proofs in memory.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rocq (1),
.PP
.I
The Rocq Reference Manual
.PP
The Coq web site: http://coq.inria.fr
.PP
/usr/share/doc/rocqide/FAQ
.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Samuel Mimram <samuel.mimram@ens-lyon.org>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
