.TH ROCQCHK 1
.
.SH NAME
rocqchk \- verify compiled Rocq libraries
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rocqchk
[
options
]
.I modules
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
.B rocqchk
is the standalone checker of compiled libraries (.vo files produced by
.BR rocq compile )
for the Rocq Prover.
See the
.I Reference Manual
for more information.
It returns with exit code 0 if all the requested tasks succeeded.
A non-zero return code means that something went wrong: some
library was not found, corrupted content, type-checking failure, etc.
.PP
.I modules
is a list of modules to be checked.
Modules can be referred to by a short or qualified logical name,
or by their filename.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.TP
.BI \-I \ dir, \ \-\-include \ dir
Add directory
.I dir
to the include path.
.
.TP
.BI \-Q \ dir\ rocqdir
Map physical
.I dir
to logical
.I rocqdir.
.
.TP
.BI \-R \ dir\ rocqdir
Synonymous to
.BR \-Q .
.
.TP
.B \-silent
Be less verbose.
.
.TP
.BI \-admit \ module
Tag the specified module and all its dependencies as trusted, and will
not be rechecked, unless explicitly requested by other options.
.
.TP
.BI \-norec \ module
Specifies that the given module shall be verified without requesting
to check its dependencies.
.
.TP
.BR \-m ,\  \-\-memory
Displays a summary of the memory used by the checker.
.
.TP
.BR \-o ,\  \-\-output\-context
Displays a summary of the logical content that have been
verified: assumptions and usage of impredicativity.
.
.TP
.B \-impredicative\-set
Allows the checker to accept libraries that have been compiled with
this flag.
.
.TP
.B \-v
Print
.B rocqchk
version and exit.
.
.TP
.BI \-coqlib \ dir
Overrides the default location of the standard library.
.
.TP
.B \-where
Print rocqchk standard library location and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-h ,\  \-\-help
Print list of options.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rocq (1),
.PP
.I
The Rocq Reference Manual.
.PP
The Rocq web site: http://coq.inria.fr
