.TH coqdoc 1 "April, 2006"

.SH NAME
coqdoc \- A documentation tool for the Coq proof assistant


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B coqdoc
[
.B options
]
.B files


.SH DESCRIPTION

.B coqdoc
is a documentation tool for the Coq proof assistant.
It creates LaTeX or HTML documents from a set of Coq files.
See the Coq reference manual for documentation (url below).


.SH OPTIONS

.SS Overall options

.TP
.BI \-h
Help. Will give you the complete list of options accepted by coqdoc.
.TP
.B \-\-html
Select a HTML output.
.TP
.B \-\-latex
Select a LATEX output.
.TP
.B \-\-dvi
Select a DVI output.
.TP
.B \-\-ps
Select a PostScript output.
.TP
.B \-\-texmacs
Select a TeXmacs output.
.TP
.B \-\-stdout
Redirect the output to stdout
.TP
.BI \-o \ file, \-\-output \ file
Redirect the output into the file 
.I file.
.TP
.BI \-d \ dir, \ \-\-directory \ dir
Output files into directory 
.I dir 
instead of current directory (option
-d does not change the filename specified with option -o, if any).
.TP
.B \-s, \ \-\-short
Do not insert titles for the files. The default behavior is to insert
a title like ``Library Foo'' for each file.
.TP
.BI \-t \ string, \ \-\-title \ string
Set the document title.
.TP
.B \-\-body\-only
Suppress the header and trailer of the final document. Thus, you can
insert the resulting document into a larger one.
.TP
.BI \-p \ string, \ \-\-preamble \ string
Insert some material in the LATEX preamble, right before \\begin{document} (meaningless with -html).
.TP
.BI \-\-vernac\-file \ file, \ \-\-tex\-file \ file
Considers the file `file' respectively as a .v (or .g) file or a .tex file.
.TP
.BI \-\-files\-from \ file
Read file names to process in file `file' as if they were given on the
command line. Useful for program sources splitted in several
directories.
.TP
.B \-q, \ \-\-quiet
Be quiet. Do not print anything except errors.
.TP
.B \-h, \ \-\-help
Give a short summary of the options and exit.
.TP
.B
\-v, \ \-\-version
Print the version and exit.

.SS Index options

Default behavior is to build an index, for the HTML output only, into
index.html.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-index
Do not output the index.
.TP
.B \-\-multi\-index
Generate one page for each category and each letter in the index,
together with a top page index.html.

.SS Table of contents option
 
.TP
.B \-toc, \ \-\-table\-of\-contents
Insert a table of contents. For a LATEX output, it inserts a
\\tableofcontents at the beginning of the document. For a HTML output,
it builds a table of contents into toc.html.

.SS Hyperlinks options

.TP
.B \-\-glob\-from \ file
Make references using Coq globalizations from file file. (Such
globalizations are obtained with Coq option -dump-glob).

.TP
.B \-\-no\-externals
Do not insert links to the Coq standard library.

.TP
.BI \-\-coqlib \ url
Set base URL for the Coq standard library (default is http://coq.inria.fr/library/).

.TP
.BI \-\-coqlib_path \ dir
Set the base path where the Coq files are installed, especially style files coqdoc.sty and coqdoc.css.

.TP
.BI -R \ dir \  coqdir
Map physical directory dir to Coq logical directory coqdir (similarly
to Coq option -R).
.B Note: 
option -R only has effect on the files following it on the command
line, so you will probably need to put this option first.

.SS Contents options

.TP
.B -g, \ --gallina
Do not print proofs.

.TP
.B -l, \ --light
Light mode. Suppress proofs (as with -g) and the following commands:

        * [Recursive] Tactic Definition
        * Hint / Hints
        * Require
        * Transparent / Opaque
        * Implicit Argument / Implicits
        * Section / Variable / Hypothesis / End 

The behavior of options -g and -l can be locally overridden using the (* begin show *) ... (* end show *) environment (see above).

.SS Language options
 
Default behavior is to assume ASCII 7 bits input files.

.TP 
.B -latin1, \ --latin1
Select ISO-8859-1 input files. It is equivalent to --inputenc latin1
--charset iso-8859-1.

.TP 
.B -utf8, \ --utf8
Select UTF-8 (Unicode) input files. It is equivalent to --inputenc
utf8 --charset utf-8. LATEX UTF-8 support can be found at
http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/contrib/supported/unicode/.

.TP 
.BI --inputenc \ string
Give a LATEX input encoding, as an option to LATEX package inputenc.

.TP
.BI --charset \ string
Specify the HTML character set, to be inserted in the HTML header.


.SH SEE ALSO

.I
The Coq Reference Manual from http://coq.inria.fr/

