=============================
 Documenting Coq with Sphinx
=============================

..
   README.rst is auto-generated from README.template.rst and the coqrst docs;
   use ``doc/tools/coqrst/regen_readme.py`` to rebuild it.

Coq's reference manual is written in `reStructuredText <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html>`_ (“reST”), and compiled with `Sphinx <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`_.

In addition to standard reST directives (a directive is similar to a LaTeX environment) and roles (a role is similar to a LaTeX command), the ``coqrst`` plugin loaded by the documentation uses a custom *Coq domain* — a set of Coq-specific directives that define *objects* like tactics, commands (vernacs), warnings, etc. —, some custom *directives*, and a few custom *roles*.  Finally, this manual uses a small DSL to describe tactic invocations and commands.

Coq objects
===========

Our Coq domain define multiple `objects`_.  Each object has a *signature* (think *type signature*), followed by an optional body (a description of that object).  The following example defines two objects: a variant of the ``simpl`` tactic, and an error that it may raise::

   .. tacv:: simpl @pattern at {+ @num}
      :name: simpl_at

      This applies ``simpl`` only to the :n:`{+ @num}` occurrences of the subterms
      matching :n:`@pattern` in the current goal.

      .. exn:: Too few occurrences

Objects are automatically collected into indices, and can be linked to using the role version of the object's directive. For example, you could link to the tactic variant above using ``:tacv:`simpl_at```, and to its exception using ``:exn:`Too few occurrences```.

Names (link targets) are auto-generated for most simple objects, though they can always be overwritten using a ``:name:`` option, as shown above.

- Options, errors, warnings have their name set to their signature, with ``...`` replacing all notation bits.  For example, the auto-generated name of ``.. exn:: @qualid is not a module`` is ``... is not a module``, and a link to it would take the form ``:exn:`... is not a module```.
- Vernacs (commands) have their name set to the first word of their signature.  For example, the auto-generated name of ``Axiom @ident : @term`` is ``Axiom``, and a link to it would take the form ``:cmd:`Axiom```.
- Vernac variants, tactic notations, and tactic variants do not have a default name.

Notations
---------

The signatures of most objects can be written using a succinct DSL for Coq notations (think regular expressions written with a Lispy syntax).  A typical signature might look like ``Hint Extern @num {? @pattern} => @tactic``, which means that the ``Hint Extern`` command takes a number (``num``), followed by an optional pattern, and a mandatory tactic.  The language has the following constructs (the full grammar is in `TacticNotations.g </doc/tools/coqrst/notations/TacticNotations.g>`_):

``@…``
  A placeholder (``@ident``, ``@num``, ``@tactic``\ …)

``{? …}``
  an optional block

``{* …}``, ``{+ …}``
  an optional (``*``) or mandatory (``+``) block that can be repeated, with repetitions separated by spaces

``{*, …}``, ``{+, …}``
  an optional or mandatory repeatable block, with repetitions separated by commas

``%|``, ``%{``, …
  an escaped character (rendered without the leading ``%``)

..
   FIXME document the new subscript support

As an exercise, what do the following patterns mean?

.. code::

   pattern {+, @term {? at {+ @num}}}
   generalize {+, @term at {+ @num} as @ident}
   fix @ident @num with {+ (@ident {+ @binder} {? {struct @ident'}} : @type)}

Objects
-------

Here is the list of all objects of the Coq domain (The symbol :black_nib: indicates an object whose signature can be written using the notations DSL):

``.. cmd::`` :black_nib: A Coq command.
    Example::

       .. cmd:: Infix "@symbol" := @term ({+, @modifier}).

          This command is equivalent to :n:`…`.

``.. cmdv::`` :black_nib: A variant of a Coq command.
    Example::

       .. cmd:: Axiom @ident : @term.

          This command links :token:`term` to the name :token:`term` as its specification in
          the global context. The fact asserted by :token:`term` is thus assumed as a
          postulate.

          .. cmdv:: Parameter @ident : @term.

             This is equivalent to :n:`Axiom @ident : @term`.

``.. exn::`` :black_nib: An error raised by a Coq command or tactic.
    This commonly appears nested in the ``.. tacn::`` that raises the
    exception.

    Example::

       .. tacv:: assert @form by @tactic

          This tactic applies :n:`@tactic` to solve the subgoals generated by
          ``assert``.

          .. exn:: Proof is not complete

             Raised if :n:`@tactic` does not fully solve the goal.

``.. opt::`` :black_nib: A Coq option.
    Example::

       .. opt:: Nonrecursive Elimination Schemes

          This option controls whether types declared with the keywords
          :cmd:`Variant` and :cmd:`Record` get an automatic declaration of the
          induction principles.

``.. prodn::`` :black_nib: Grammar productions.
    This is useful if you intend to document individual grammar productions.
    Otherwise, use Sphinx's `production lists
    <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/markup/para.html#directive-productionlist>`_.

``.. tacn::`` :black_nib: A tactic, or a tactic notation.
    Example::

       .. tacn:: do @num @expr

          :token:`expr` is evaluated to ``v`` which must be a tactic value. …

``.. tacv::`` :black_nib: A variant of a tactic.
    Example::

       .. tacn:: fail

          This is the always-failing tactic: it does not solve any goal. It is
          useful for defining other tacticals since it can be caught by
          :tacn:`try`, :tacn:`repeat`, :tacn:`match goal`, or the branching
          tacticals. …

          .. tacv:: fail @natural

             The number is the failure level. If no level is specified, it
             defaults to 0. …

``.. thm::`` A theorem.
    Example::

       .. thm:: Bound on the ceiling function

          Let :math:`p` be an integer and :math:`c` a rational constant. Then
          :math:`p \ge c \rightarrow p \ge \lceil{c}\rceil`.

``.. warn::`` :black_nib: An warning raised by a Coq command or tactic..
    Do not mistake this for ``.. warning::``; this directive is for warning
    messages produced by Coq.


    Example::

       .. warn:: Ambiguous path

          When the coercion :token:`qualid` is added to the inheritance graph, non
          valid coercion paths are ignored.

Coq directives
==============

In addition to the objects above, the ``coqrst`` Sphinx plugin defines the following directives:

``.. coqtop::`` A reST directive to describe interactions with Coqtop.
    Usage::

       .. coqtop:: options…

          Coq code to send to coqtop

    Example::

       .. coqtop:: in reset undo

          Print nat.
          Definition a := 1.

    Here is a list of permissible options:

    - Display options

      - ``all``: Display input and output
      - ``in``: Display only input
      - ``out``: Display only output
      - ``none``: Display neither (useful for setup commands)

    - Behavior options

      - ``reset``: Send a ``Reset Initial`` command before running this block
      - ``undo``: Send an ``Undo n`` (``n`` = number of sentences) command after
        running all the commands in this block

    ``coqtop``\ 's state is preserved across consecutive ``.. coqtop::`` blocks
    of the same document (``coqrst`` creates a single ``coqtop`` process per
    reST source file).  Use the ``reset`` option to reset Coq's state.

``.. coqdoc::`` A reST directive to display Coqtop-formatted source code.
    Usage::

       .. coqdoc::

          Coq code to highlight

    Example::

       .. coqdoc::

          Definition test := 1.

``.. example::`` A reST directive for examples.
    This behaves like a generic admonition; see
    http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#generic-admonition
    for more details.

    Example::

       .. example:: Adding a hint to a database

          The following adds ``plus_comm`` to the ``plu`` database:

          .. coqdoc::

             Hint Resolve plus_comm : plu.

``.. inference::`` A reST directive to format inference rules.
    This also serves as a small illustration of the way to create new Sphinx
    directives.

    Usage::

       .. inference:: name

          newline-separated premisses
          ------------------------
          conclusion

    Example::

       .. inference:: Prod-Pro

          \WTEG{T}{s}
          s \in \Sort
          \WTE{\Gamma::(x:T)}{U}{\Prop}
          -----------------------------
          \WTEG{\forall~x:T,U}{\Prop}

``.. preamble::`` A reST directive for hidden math.
    Mostly useful to let MathJax know about `\def`\ s and `\newcommand`\ s.

    Example::

       .. preamble::

          \newcommand{\paren}[#1]{\left(#1\right)}

Coq roles
=========

In addition to the objects and directives above, the ``coqrst`` Sphinx plugin defines the following roles:

``:g:`` Coq code.
    Use this for Gallina and Ltac snippets::

       :g:`apply plus_comm; reflexivity`
       :g:`Set Printing All.`
       :g:`forall (x: t), P(x)`

``:n:`` Any text using the notation syntax (``@id``, ``{+, …}``, etc.).
    Use this to explain tactic equivalences.  For example, you might write
    this::

       :n:`generalize @term as @ident` is just like :n:`generalize @term`, but
       it names the introduced hypothesis :token:`ident`.

    Note that this example also uses ``:token:``.  That's because ``ident`` is
    defined in the the Coq manual as a grammar production, and ``:token:``
    creates a link to that.  When referring to a placeholder that happens to be
    a grammar production, ``:token:`…``` is typically preferable to ``:n:`@…```.

``:production:`` A grammar production not included in a ``productionlist`` directive.
    Useful to informally introduce a production, as part of running text.

    Example::

       :production:`string` indicates a quoted string.

    You're not likely to use this role very commonly; instead, use a
    `production list
    <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/markup/para.html#directive-productionlist>`_
    and reference its tokens using ``:token:`…```.

Common mistakes
===============

Improper nesting
----------------

DO
  .. code::

     .. cmd:: Foo @bar

        Foo the first instance of :token:`bar`\ s.

        .. cmdv:: Foo All

           Foo all the :token:`bar`\ s in
           the current context

DON'T
  .. code::

     .. cmd:: Foo @bar

     Foo the first instance of :token:`bar`\ s.

     .. cmdv:: Foo All

     Foo all the :token:`bar`\ s in
     the current context

Overusing ``:token:``
---------------------

DO
  .. code::

     This is equivalent to :n:`Axiom @ident : @term`.

DON'T
  .. code::

     This is equivalent to ``Axiom`` :token`ident` : :token:`term`.

Omitting annotations
--------------------

DO
  .. code::

     .. tacv:: assert @form as @intro_pattern

DON'T
  .. code::

     .. tacv:: assert form as intro_pattern

Tips and tricks
===============

Nested lemmas
-------------

The ``.. coqtop::`` directive does *not* reset Coq after running its contents.  That is, the following will create two nested lemmas::

   .. coqtop:: all

      Lemma l1: 1 + 1 = 2.

   .. coqtop:: all

      Lemma l2: 2 + 2 <> 1.

Add either ``undo`` to the first block or ``reset`` to the second block to avoid nesting lemmas.

Abbreviations and macros
------------------------

Abbreviations and placeholders for specially-formatted names (like ``|Cic|``, ``|Coq|``, ``|CoqIDE|``, ``|Ltac|``, and ``|Gallina|``) are defined in a `separate file </doc/sphinx/replaces.rst>`_ included by most chapters of the manual.  Some useful LaTeX macros are defined in `</doc/sphinx/preamble.rst>`_.

Emacs
-----

The ``dev/tools/coqdev.el`` folder contains a convenient Emacs function to quickly insert Sphinx roles and quotes.  It takes a single character (one of ``gntm:```), and inserts one of ``:g:``, ``:n:``, ``:t:``, or an arbitrary role, or double quotes.  You can also select a region of text, and wrap it in single or double backticks using that function.

Use the following snippet to bind it to :kbd:`F12` in ``rst-mode``::

   (with-eval-after-load 'rst
     (define-key rst-mode-map (kbd "<f12>") #'coqdev-sphinx-rst-coq-action))
